Prometheus, with his axe, had slashed open the skull of Zeus, and Prometheus
slices through it with an axe, which by the way is a symbol of cutting through
fatalism, and Prometheus delivers Athena from out of the skull of Zeus, and who
is she? She's the goddess of wisdom and war. The forgetfulness of Epimetheus, which
is the flip side of the Prometheus, lines up being responsible for the fact
that man lacks an essence, and therefore Prometheus enlists the aid of Athena.
Prometheus is molding mankind. Athena puts a butterfly into the mind, usually it's
into the head of humanity. The butterfly is the ultimate symbol of
metamorphosis and transformation, so it's underlining the fact that there is no
human nature. The point is Prometheus brought the gift of Technatoman so that
we could determine our own destiny. Right now we are at the 11th hour, we're at a
key turning point in the face of the technological singularity. Prometheus is
a figure that represents the promise of technological science. It's more
important than ever right now to positively reappropriate this myth and
understand the power that it already has over us unconsciously. We need to take
that unconscious power, that demonic power of the Prometheus archetype over
our society, and transform it into something that's more self-conscious and
that can be directed in a positive manner. Pashetan means the adversary, and so
is he the adversary? Hell yeah, he's the adversary. Prometheus is the original
adversary.
Welcome back to the Gnostic Informant, and you are about to attain true gnosis.
Today, returning is one of the highly demanded scholars. Dr. Jason Rezegiorgiani,
author of Prometheism, lovers of Sophia, Iranian Leviathan. Prometheus and Atlas,
and a ton of more books, but today, we get the pleasure of talking about Prometheus,
one of the more fascinating characters in mythology. Who is he? What is his story?
We have fragments, we have different writers like Askelos who talks about some of the
stuff that happens in his in his myth, but let's put it all together in one spot.
So Dr. Rezegiorgiani, first of all, welcome to Gnostic Informant again. I'm glad I had you back on.
Let's talk about Prometheus and what exactly is, if we put together his myth into one coherent story,
what is it? So Neil, first of all, great to be back on. Always a pleasure.
The thing about the myth of Prometheus is that it isn't nearly as widely known as it ought to be.
To the point where you have to wonder, and after all, this is a Gnostic-oriented program,
you have to wonder whether there hasn't been some kind of archontic suppression,
because, you know, many Greek myths are the subject of countless children's books and film
adaptations, right, even Hollywood films and so on and so forth, but here we're dealing with a myth
that spans from the War of the Gods and the Titans to the creation of mankind
to the great flood that destroyed a worldwide human civilization, right? I mean, the myth of Prometheus
is unparalleled in terms of its monumental scope, addressing all of the key turning points of, you
know, the creation, evolution, and a potential past destruction of mankind. So why is this myth
as obscure as it is? I think it's because the essence of this myth is a call to rebellion and
self-determination that's extremely threatening to any reigning establishment, and so in the
classical world this myth was already being suppressed because it was a threat to, you know,
the Olympian world order of that time, and then as this myth transformed and we'll discuss this
into a Luciferian form after the advent of Christianity, particularly, you know,
from the Middle Ages through the Renaissance into the early modern period when Prometheus
is rediscovered and reappropriated by particularly romantic authors like Byron and Shelley and
Goethe and so forth. Prometheus yet again became a symbol of insurrection and human
self-determination that was threatening both to the church and to the state, and so this is why I
think that, you know, it's been rendered far more obscure than it ought to be, and so let's unpack,
you know, the core symbols and main twists and turns of this very powerful, I was about to say
epic, but really what it is is a tragedy, and in fact as we'll get into it, Prometheus is the first
known tragedy in the recorded history of human literature. Wow, that's fascinating.
So where should we start? Should we start maybe with the sources? Just a review of...
Because I know you got in Hesiod, you have a lot of Prometheus stuff happening with,
you mentioned Ducalion and the flood, Prometheus sort of plays this role, and I almost wonder if
there's an older proto-Indo-European myth that predates the Sumerians and this myth because
he looks like he's playing the same role Anki's playing in Sumeria, where he tells, well Anki
tells what a Gilgamesh or whoever, hey build a flood because Anu's going to flood everybody out,
but in the Hesiod myth he's like, it's just Zeus doing that, it's the same thing,
and then you have Oscalus, but I'm jumping ahead now, but yeah, let's get to the sources, sure.
So there most certainly is both an Indo-European predecessor or prototype for this myth
and also a Sumerian one, and actually since you went there, let me just run with that,
that basically the myth of Prometheus in its Greek form appears to be a synthesis
of the myth of Anki with the story of a figure called Amirani, and so let me start with the lesser
known one, Amirani is a fire-bringing titan that was worshiped by the Schizian branch of the Iranian
peoples who lived in the Caucasus. Now of course, you know, if anyone knows even the
littlest bit about the myth of Prometheus, they know that Prometheus was bound in the Caucasus
by Zeus, this is where, you know, it's the site where he's punished, tortured for having been
the benefactor of mankind. So in the Caucasus Mountains, there was actually this cult of Amirani,
and you had the Schizians worshipping a titan who waged war against the gods
and who brought fire to mankind and taught humans metallurgy, including how to forge weapons,
and you often see imagery of Amirani in particularly what's present day Georgia,
which used to be, you know, a Schizian-Iranian territory, and in fact the last remnant of
the Schizian people, the Ossetians, still live in Georgia today. And so in that area of Georgia and
Ossetia, this, you know, stronghold of the Iranians in the Caucasus, you see this imagery of Amirani
holding a torch in one hand and a sword in the other, you know, symbolizing the fact that this
fire that he stole from the heavens and brought to humanity was used as a fire of the forge,
including in order to empower humanity to basically declare its independence from tyrannical and
unjust gods. So this Amirani figure also winds up being chained and attacked by the eagle of the
tyrannical lord that he leads humanity in a rebellion against. And we'll come to this later
as part of, you know, the various episodes in the myth of Prometheus, but ultimately Hercules,
or the Greek Heracles, frees Prometheus from, you know, his torture being chained to this rock,
and he does so by shooting the eagle of Zeus through with arrows. And this is part of the
Amirani myth that there is this figure who the Greeks called the Schythian Hercules and who the
Ossetians refer to as Batras and who the Eastern Schythians called Rostam, Rostame Saxi, Rostam
the Schythian born, who becomes the epic hero of the Persian national epic, the Shahnameh.
And so this figure in the Amirani myth is the one who comes and frees Amirani by shooting this eagle
through with arrows. And this was such a widely disseminated and deeply entrenched element of
Schythian folklore that the people in Ossetia to this day still have a tradition of destroying
eagle's nests when they find them as a reverence of, you know, a memorialization of
the freeing of Amirani. So clearly there are these elements of the Prometheus myth there.
And it also is worth mentioning in that regard that the Parthian dynasty of Iran
were descended from Schythians. They adopted the Persian, you know, imperial culture and the
legacy of the Achaemenid Persians, but they were not Persians, they were descended from Schythians.
So they were more nomadic barbarian people who then came and took over the seat of the empire
and created the second empire of Iran, the Parthian empire, which was the great rival of classical Rome.
And these Parthians had a myth that was so important to them that it was the basis for the
iconography on their coins. These Parthians had a myth that Perseus stole fire from the heavens
and brought it to mankind and established the order of the Magi in order to be the guardians
of the eternal flame on the earth. And according to this myth, Perseus, the son of Perseus,
was the patriarch of the Persian people. Now, this is interesting because
in the iconography of Perseus slaying Medusa, Perseus is looking away from the head of the
Gorgon as he severs it. And it's been noted by art historians that the iconography of the bull slaying
in Mithraism has this same posture, and you don't find it anywhere else in classical art.
Mithras is looking away from the head of the bull as he slits its throat. And in Mithraism,
Mithra is portrayed as going to battle against Zorvan, who is basically Kronos, the Lord of Time.
And this becomes very significant to the myth of Prometheus. So Mithra overpowers Zorvan,
and Zorvan was depicted as a Gorgon. So the Medusa imagery in the myth of Perseus is like
a later reiteration of this archaic-mythraic idea of Mithra, namely what becomes later Perseus,
slaying the Gorgonic Lord of Time and appropriating its power in the form of the severed head,
but looking away from it at the same time. And this same figure steals fire from the heavens,
brings it down to earth. His son is the patriarch of the Persians, and he creates the order of the
Magi, namely the priests of Zarathustra's religion, to be the guardians of the fire. And
there are a lot of elements of the teaching of Zarathustra, like the use of the term Titan of
Wisdom to refer to Aura Mazda, the main symbol of the religion being the eternal fire,
the main quality of Aura Mazda being forethought, which is a synonym of Promethea,
the root of the name of Prometheus, forethought, or thinking ahead, or the progressive
mentality, the forward-oriented mind. And so you can see that there's this older
Indo-European, particularly Iranian, matrix of the Prometheus myth coming from out of the Caucasus,
which is a general region of Zarathustra as well. He was a little bit further to the south
and around Lake Urumye in Iranian Azerbaijan, but same general region around the Caspian Sea.
And it looks like what happened is this myth fused with the myth of Angie. And how did that happen?
Well, the Persian Empire emanating from out of Persia, from out of the territory right above
the Persian Gulf, took both Mesopotamia, and then of course the Iranians were native
inhabitants of the Caucasus, so the Persian Empire connected the territory where the Sumerian
myths were prevalent, with the territory where you had the myth of Amirani in the Caucasus.
And these two somehow fused so that by the time Hesiod is living in Anatolia, which again is part
of the Persian Empire, Hesiod was a citizen of Iran. Well, Hesiod's time actually was slightly
before the Persian Empire, but the Medes were already very dominant going into southern Anatolia.
And then the Medes and the Persians joined together to create this empire. In any case,
the territory where Hesiod winds up basically functioning as this bard and laying this ground
work for Greek folklore becomes a core part of the Persian Empire. And I think that these two
myths fused there. So what's the other one, the myth of Angie, which is about how there's this
conflict between two brothers among the Anunnaki. One of them wants to create mankind as a slave
race to serve the various purposes of these gods who came down to earth from the heavens.
And that's Elel, Elel or Enlil. And he's a storm god, basically Jehovah. And his psychological
profile is more or less identical to that of Jehovah in the Old Testament, Yahweh.
I think even El comes from that, right?
El, exactly. Yeah, so El. Yeah.
And then, yeah, and Elel, it's interesting, Elel, Allah, Allah, El, Allah, the Muslim thing
is no god but El. You could think about, they translated these days, they love to say there's
no god but God, as if it's some universalistic statement. You have this abstract monotheistic
theology. But really, in a way, you could read that as saying there's no god but El, namely Elel.
And the letter, and the out of the Semitic olive, whether it's Arabic or Hebrew or whatever,
that's the El, that's the letter you use for El. It's not hell, because you use a hat for the
letter E. So people don't realize that it really is El, not El, but they just pronounce El.
Yes. It's all the evolution of the El cult. And this El bastard wanted to create us as a slave race,
meant to just serve the purposes of the Anunnaki.
Well, since we're on the subject, I noticed they try to polemicize this Titan mythology,
because they make it look like these are fallen angels that are giving metal,
algae, and fire to Enoch. And this is in the myth of Enoch, where you have Ezzel and
Samael and all these different fallen demon angels or whatever they are. And they're falling in love
with the women and they're teaching men how to use fire and teaching them how to use metals.
And you're like, wait a minute, are they polemicizing the other myth? And that's probably what's going
on. Absolutely. Now, I was going to wait to get to this, but look, it's just so this, we're in
a better flow here. Let me just say it right now, that in the myth of Prometheus,
it said that Prometheus didn't just bring fire, you know, didn't just steal fire from the workshop
of Hephaestus on Mount Olympus and bring it as a gift to mankind. Prometheus taught humanity
the various arts and sciences. Prometheus teacher in every art is how Escalus puts it.
And so Prometheus, in that Greek version of the myth, is performing exactly the same function.
Teacher in every art brought the fire as a means to mighty ends, Escalus says, mighty ends, like
the way Amirani taught humanity how to use this fire to forge weapons among other things, among
other metallurgical, you know, crafts, right. And so Prometheus is doing exactly what the
fallen angels were supposedly doing in the book of Enoch. The book of Enoch was basically censored
from the Old Testament. It survived more or less only in an Ethiopian form. And it explains what
the hell happened in Genesis six, which is an absolutely, you know, it's an absurd part of the
Bible, where in like, literally one paragraph, you're told that these angels came down and they
had sex with, you know, mortal women, and there was this race of giants consequently sired on the
earth, and they became rebellious against heaven. And God decides as a result of this to basically
wipe out all of mankind in this global deluge. And you're left wondering, with this one paragraph,
like, what the hell happened here? What could have happened that God has decided to wipe clean
his whole creation, right? And by the way, what kind of God is this who didn't see this coming?
Anyway, clearly not an omniscient God. So it's basically LL, or as we're going to see Zeus in
the myth Prometheus. And so Prometheus does exactly what the fallen angels supposedly did,
which you see in the book of Enoch, it expands on Genesis six at length and talks about how
they came down and their purpose was to empower humanity. Then we're just coming down have sex
with mortal women. They were having sex with mortal women to create a race of hybrids on the
earth who would be able to contest, you know, the sovereignty of the gods would be able to lead a
essentially liberation struggle against heaven and to storm heaven as it were. And so they teach
humanity all the arts and sciences exactly what Prometheus did and exactly what Enki is supposed
to have done. So Enki, Enki is the creator of mankind. Just like in the myth of Prometheus,
it's not Zeus who creates humanity. Prometheus is the architect of humanity, the father of mankind.
And he's a good father. He's the father who wants his children to flourish,
and he beneficently attempts to empower them. He's the kind of father who wants to see his
children do even better than him. And so he teaches humanity all these arts and sciences.
Just like Enki sends seven sages to teach humanity all of the various crafts. And, you know,
Ella was furious about this. And, you know, then it lays the groundwork ultimately for this global
deluge to basically decimate the high civilization that develops on the basis of the arts and the
sciences that were taught to humanity by the rebel and Enki, or as the Christians later call them,
the fallen angels. And you see all of this in the myth of Prometheus. I mean, you know,
so I'm really jumping ahead now, but and we can come back around to it in a sequential order.
But basically, you know, people lose sight of the fact that the flood myth exists as part of the
myth of Prometheus in Greek culture. Prometheus' son, Dukallion, is the Greek Noah figure.
Right. Except that the Greek version makes a hell of a lot more sense.
Right. Because why would the same God who's trying to wipe out humanity with a flood appoint
someone to save humanity from the flood? It doesn't make any sense. This is a Yahwist appropriation
of an older myth, which was threatening to that religious establishment, a myth wherein it's the
son or a representative of the Enki figure, son of Prometheus, who attempts to save what he can
of humanity from this global deluge. And so this is Dukallion and Dukallion is depicted very much
in the guise of the sages that worked with Enki as a kind of civilizer. He not only saves a portion
of humanity from this flood, he helps to reestablish civilization on the earth. So he's kind of like
you could say the bricklayer of the Tower of Babel to put it in biblical terms. The one who, you
know, makes another attempt after the flood to build a tower to the heavens to empower and
unify humanity. So, yeah, so the myth of Dukallion connects Prometheus to the flood myth in the
Bible and underlines the fact that Prometheus is essentially, to put it in biblical terms,
the leader of the fallen angels. Figures that later winds up being called Lucifer. And well,
what's Lucifer? The bringer of the light. Well, that's the fire that he brought from heaven. It's
pretty obvious. Which is funny because in Lucifer's Roman mythology with Ovid and other writers,
there's nothing evil about him. He's a hero. He's like, he's a savior god. There's nothing,
he's not Satanic or whatever the hell the Christians try to say about him later on.
Or Isaiah tries to say about him in his text. He's just, he's just a light bringer. He's the
son of dawn. Yeah. Well, but the thing is, he is Satanic in the sense that the word Satan,
shaitan, just means ha-shaitan in Hebrew or shaitan in Arabic. Ha-shaitan means the adversary.
And so is he the adversary? Hell yeah, he's the adversary. Prometheus is the original
adversary. Right? And, and there's something, and I want to come back to this flood myth. Okay,
but let me just go on a tangent for a minute back to the very beginning, right? Because I want to
highlight the way in which this character is radically adversarial. Prometheus betrays the
Titans. He's an adversary first against his fellow Titans. So he's not a god. Prometheus is a Titan.
And he turns on the Titans and sides with Zeus in the Titanomachia, in the clash of the Titans,
because Prometheus goes to these fellow Titans. He's like, listen, you can't defeat these Olympians
through brute force. I'm telling you, there's got to be strategy here. He lays out stratagems
with his forethought and they won't have it. And so Prometheus takes the position that, well,
you know, these Titans are going to lose. This is a lose. It's futile. They're going to lose.
And so in order to basically put himself in a better position for achieving a more long-term
objective, he shrewdly sides with the Olympians and helps Zeus come to power.
Then he realizes in due course that, and let me just point a couple of things out before I continue
down that road, that when this happens, Prometheus has three brothers and two of them wind up being
punished by Zeus after he comes to power, after the Olympians win in the Titanomachia.
Two of Prometheus's three brothers are punished together with the other Titans. And one of them
is a figure called Minotius. Minotius was bound in Tartarus under the earth together with the other
Titans. And he's the Titan of excessive wrath, prideful rage, and hubris. So you can see how
this is a shadow side of Prometheus that later is integrated into the Judeo-Christian image
of Satan. It's the side of Prometheus, the brother of Prometheus as it were, who is bound under the
earth. In other words, what becomes later hell in the Judeo-Christian cosmology. He's that side of
Prometheus that is bound in the pit of hell as it were and has this exceedingly wrathful,
prideful defiance of Zeus from the beginning. And then the other brother of Prometheus,
another brother of Prometheus, Atlas, is the strongest of the Titans and he led the Titans in
the battle. He was the general who leads the Titans in the Titanomachia and he's punished
by forcing him to separate heaven and earth through bearing the celestial sphere on his
own shoulders, which is an incredibly powerful symbol. Because it means that he's not just
separating heaven and earth, he's connecting heaven and earth. So heaven and earth are connected
through Atlas and remember Atlas was against Zeus and so in a way he's sort of in this dynamic
position where he could storm heaven from the earth because he's the one holding up the heavens.
And then later Atlas becomes a metaphor for all kinds of basically maps of knowledge.
Right, that's good. Atlas is in the sense of star charts which
seafarers use to navigate the oceans. And so then map making was associated with Atlas,
Atlas is of the world. And then even in medicine you have Atlas is of the human body,
you know, the basically, you know, this portrayals of the skeletal system and the nervous system and
so on. They're called medical Atlas. And so Atlas is a term that's very much associated with
bodies of knowledge and mapping out the world for the sake of gaining greater knowledge.
And so in this way Atlas is also intimately connected with the meaning of the myth of Prometheus
and reflects another aspect of Prometheus' association with science and technology,
which is of course that the light of the fire that he brings from Olympus,
the light of the fire in the dark night of human ignorance, and also the fire of the
forge that's a symbol of technological science. And so it's not incidental that Atlas is the
brother of Prometheus, it's emphasizing the association of Prometheus with technological
science and humanity's quest for knowledge and mapping out of the world through human
initiative and exploration and the quest for discovery. And then the last brother of Prometheus
is Epimetheus, who, he's the fool, he's the idiot, his name means afterthought.
Instead of forethought Prometheus, it comes from Epimetheus, which is the opposite
adjectival quality, meaning afterthought or hindsight, like, you know, like when you look
back and say, shit, I shouldn't have done that, you know, that's Epimetheus, you know,
hard-earned hindsight and realizing something only in retrospect. So Epimetheus, the other
brother of Prometheus, is this forgetful fool, right, hindsight, we're talking about, you know,
how his name means afterthought. And he sides with Prometheus, takes his advice that they should
basically help Zeus come to power. And so he's rewarded by being allowed to help Prometheus
in the creation of mankind, and in fact, in the creation of the animals in general. So Epimetheus
functions as a kind of subcontractor who helps Prometheus as Prometheus is, you know, molding
mankind from out of clay. And by the way, just on a side note, this whole issue of man being
molded from out of clay, the race of man being molded from out of clay is significant because
in the Semitic tradition that eventually yields Islam, it's said that before the race of clay,
which, you know, is Adam, the race of Adam, which is not just a person, but a race, Adam
is a mankind made of clay. And according to the Semitic myths before Adam, there was a race made
of fire on the earth. And so it appeared, and of course fire is the element associated with Prometheus.
And this race of fire rebelled against the angels, against the
Malayech, you know, the angels, and against El, against Allah. And they're punished. So it appears
and their civilization is wiped off the face of the earth. So it appears that yet again,
there is this parallel from the Greek myth to, you know, some kind of Semitic version,
where the satanic is associated with the race of fire. And then the race of man,
the race of clay is seen as being subsequent to that. And so the myth of Prometheus is extremely
subversive in an Islamic context, because it's suggesting that actually the race of clay wasn't
created by Allah, the way it says in the Quran, the race of clay was created by one of these
beings of fire, who was a rebel against Allah. Right. And again, another myth that's been
reappropriated, misappropriated by Yahwists, or if we want to put it in Islamic terminology,
you know, Muslims, right, submitters, as the name suggests. So okay, what we were talking about was
the nature of Prometheus as a primordial adversary. So what does this character do this,
this Epimetheus, he's helping Prometheus create man. And he gives fur to certain animals and
claws to other animals to be able to fend for themselves. And he gives sharp teeth to certain
other creatures so that they can hunt their food, you know, with their mouths, and basically give
some kind of survival advantage to every creature. But then when it comes to man, Epimetheus forgives,
forgets to give man any essential quality that would be able to
afford him, you know, a survival, a survival advantage that would be able to,
you know, secure his existence on the earth. And so man is left lacking an essence. This is
extremely important. The forgetfulness of Epimetheus, which is the flip side of the
Promethea of Prometheus, winds up being responsible for the fact that man lacks an essence.
And therefore Prometheus enlists the aid of Athena,
humanity with its soul in the form of a butterfly. So Athena appears in the myth of Prometheus at
this point. And there are many images of this, there are reliefs of it, it appears on some
seals, it's on some vases and other, you know, Greek pottery. This image of Athena coming in
as Prometheus is molding mankind. And there's Epimetheus to the side who forgets to endow
man with any essence. And Athena puts a butterfly into the mind, usually it's into the head of
humanity. Now why Athena? Why does Athena help? Because Prometheus had midwife Athena into existence.
Prometheus with his axe had slashed open the skull of Zeus in a kind of, you know,
play on a Caesarean section, had split open the close-knit Pekinos, mind of Zeus. It's an incredibly
important image. So Zeus is often associated with fate. And so the Pekinos or close-knit mind of Zeus
is the mesh of fate. And Prometheus slices through it with an axe, which by the way is a symbol of
cutting through fatalism. And Prometheus delivers Athena from out of the skull of Zeus. And who
is she? She's the goddess of wisdom and war. I was just gonna say something. Because in the
Gnostic text, you had this understanding of Yahweh thinks he created humans, but really
he was in it. He think somehow he had a dream or he thought he created Adam. But really it was Sophia
wisdom that did it. And she looks at him like, you don't even know, I'm the one who did all this.
And then, but what's even crazier is that the Gnostics who get called heretics for this,
they're pointing to the Bible itself and saying, no, no, no, the book of Proverbs says that Sophia
was there from the beginning. The wisdom of Solomon says Sophia created the first father.
So like this is accurate as far as the scriptures say, not just making this stuff up. And then it
lines up with what you're saying, Athena being Sophia as well, and then the titan of wisdom,
creating mankind. So even the even the Yahwes have some of their own sources, right, putting this
stuff in there and sort of snitching on themselves. Absolutely, absolutely. So that you have the
prototype for the Sophianic figure. And in Athena, who is the goddess of wisdom and war, why wisdom
and war? Because you cannot gain wisdom without going to war. Because Zeus wants us ignorant.
The Olympians don't want us to be wise. They are the prototype for what later become the Gnostic
Archons. And so to seek wisdom is to be prepared to go to war against the gods. That's why Athena is
the goddess of wisdom and war inextricably. Okay. And so this is also the message of the
Bhagavad Gita, where where where where where Christian is telling Arjun, you have to go to
war. There's no, no, you have to make an action right now. You cannot just sit by and let your
uncle do his thing. You have to fight your uncle. That's a that's a deep thing right there.
In a Greek context, it winds up being epitomized by Heraclitus in the fragments of Heraclitus,
who by the way, I mean, next to Pythagoras is the first philosopher in Greek history. Heraclitus
says war is father and king of all. Some men, it shows or he he shows to be slaves. Others,
he he reveals to be free men. All things come to pass and are ordained in accordance with conflict.
Right. And so look, a wisdom and war. So why does Athena help Prometheus in this situation where
man is left lacking in essence on accounts of the forgetfulness of Epimetheus? Well,
because Prometheus was the midwife of Athena's birth. Right. Okay. And so Athena returns the
favor by giving man his soul in the form of a butterfly. Now, does this, does this give man an
essence? No, not really. And it's another fascinating symbol in this myth, because what's a butterfly?
The butterfly is the ultimate symbol of metamorphosis and transformation. Wow. So it's
underlining the fact that there is no human nature. There's no human nature.
Human quote unquote, nature is to transform, to evolve, to become something else. We are beings
of radical becoming. And then what's the other thing that Prometheus has to give
man in order to basically give him a chance to fend for himself, because he doesn't have the
claws that other animals do, where the, you know, large jaws and sharp teeth of other animals are
fur, so as not to freeze in the winter, humanity, humanity is gifted fire as a tool of survival.
Okay. So fire, which is the fire of the forge, which is the fountain head of all the crafts,
and ultimately of technological science, is a remedy for the fact that we are lacking in essence.
So what's this myth saying? I mean, why is it that Heidegger and Marx, who don't agree on,
you know, all that, I mean, Marx is seen as the intellectual godfather of the left,
and Heidegger was literally a Nazi. So, you know, there's some degree of divergence between
Marx and Heidegger, but they both said Prometheus was the founder of philosophy that Prometheus is,
not God, but divinity, that inaugurates philosophy, okay? His name affects that too,
forethought. Yeah, but look, it's because why do Marx and Heidegger agree? Because Marx is all about
how modern industrial capitalism is going to free humanity through a revolutionary,
you know, dialectic, that modern industrial capitalism is going to be transformed
in a way where the power of industry ultimately liberates mankind, and the industry is
reappropriated by the workers, and they are no longer alienated from their labor,
and they ultimately become sovereign and self-determined. And then Heidegger,
the focus of his philosophical project, was how the trajectory of science, of abstract
rational thought from Plato onward through Descartes ultimately culminates in modern technological
science, and that, you know, we have to find some way to poetically reintegrate the transformative
power of modern technological science. So, you know, ultimately what Heidegger saw in the myth
of Prometheus has a lot to do with the fact that fire and the butterfly were the two remedies
for mankind being lacking in an essence, in the sense that we, uniquely among all animals,
define our own essence. Our existence precedes our essence, and the nature of our existence
is to define our own essence through the power of technology, and to be the, basically,
the stewards of our own evolution. So, we are these butterflies that go through a process of
metamorphosis from the caterpillar through the chrysalis, right, to ultimately becoming this
creature. It's kind of like what Nietzsche's getting at with the rope and the Superman thing.
Exactly, exactly. It is the first version of that symbol or metaphor that ultimately becomes
Nietzsche's tight rope between ape and overman. And I also noticed that all of the ancient Greek
mysteries, all the great myths, basically, there's usually some sort of metamorphosis involved with
the hero, with the savior, with the messiah, whoever it is, they all have some sort of apotheosis,
metamorphosis, some sort of resurrection, something like that, which makes it a standard
mysteries, I guess you would say, initiation cult or something like that.
That's the common thread between all of them. You know what I mean?
Sure, I do know what you mean, but the thing is that the Olympian world order is predicated
on the stasis of humanity. And so to the extent that there are, you know, hero, by the way,
originally, it means hybrid. It means hero means it comes from the word eros, and with
reference to the eros or sex between gods and mortals. And so the original heroes were the
people who were sired by the quote unquote fallen angels, right, and were more than mere humans,
and who actually had a rebellious nature and defied the will of heaven, right.
And so to the extent that you have these heroes engaging in developmental trajectories and
they building up their character and persona and developing an ethos and becoming basically
men in their own right, you have a defiance of what Olympus wants, which is us to basically
remain servile, you know, and submit to submit. Yeah, and not and not undergo character building,
right, which is going to give us enough psychological and ethical independence to
determine our own course in the future. So anyway, you have at the core of this myth of the creation
of mankind and emphasis of the fact that our existence precedes our essence and that through
the power of technological science, we are going to undergo various metamorphoses that
ultimately hold the potential for us to become as powerful or more powerful than the gods.
And so this is, you know, another element of the the adversarial character of Prometheus,
and then you see this continue in his next act of trickery. So Prometheus is not only a trickster
because he steals fire from the workshop of the Festus and brings it as a gift to mankind.
Prometheus is also a trickster because when Zeus comes around after the creation of humanity,
not too happy with how humanity's been created and wanting to reduce humanity to servility,
Zeus says to Prometheus, well, now that you created these things, which, you know, I'm not very happy
with, you know, how you did this. I don't know about this butterfly business, right.
But I want you to decide how they're going to sacrifice to me, right. How are these creatures
going to be brought to their knees and, you know, basically worship and revere me. And so Prometheus
devises this machination where he presents Zeus with two forms of sacrifice and asks
him to choose between them. And in one of them, he's basically taken all of the nourishing,
lean meat from an animal, from a sacrificed animal, and stuffed it into the stomach of an ox,
which is very visually displeasing. And in the other bowl is the bones, the white bones of the
sacrificed animal, but covered with a veneer of marbled fat. And Zeus picks the marbled fat,
not realizing that it's all bones underneath. And this means that man gets to keep the nourishing
part of the sacrificed animal and is basically giving nothing of importance to Olympus. So this
is another way in which we see that Prometheus does not want his children to be, you know,
a servile race revering some gods above themselves. Prometheus is trying to, you know, basically
ensure that the nourishing part of the sacrifice remains the allotment of human beings.
Right. And this is another act of trickery that he engages in, which by the way portrays Zeus as a
fool. Because I mean, how do you, what kind of God you don't realize like he's pulling a fast one
on you like this? And he see it tries to cover this up. And he see it when he writes the Theogony,
in particular, he right, he mentions the myth of Prometheus in both of his major works in works and
days, right, and in Theogony. And it's interesting that when you read works and days, Prometheus has
a little bit more autonomy. And his defiance of Zeus is a little bolder. But then when he writes
Theogony, he see it is really trying to come up with a canon of Olympian religion, right, right.
This he see a character is an epitome of Greek traditionalism, patriarchy, conservatism, misogyny,
he hates women. Okay. And so when he writes Theogony, he says absurd things like, Oh, well,
you know, Zeus knew that Prometheus was trying to pull a fast one on him. And he just, you know,
picked the the bowl of bones covered with the fat to like lure Prometheus into committing
some sin of defiance or something. He's making justifications to whitewash the vulnerabilities
of Zeus, because he's helping to build a cult of total obedience to Olympus. But then later,
you have Escalus about 50, 50, 60 years later, or something, somewhere around there, the next
century, he he see it is in the 600s BC, Escalus is in the 500s BC. By the time Escalus turns
Prometheus into the first figure of Greek tragedy, you see the more humanist and rebellious elements
of the myth, yeah, you know, basically restored to what was probably their original form.
And I noticed in that in this particular version, with Escalus, I want to ask this,
Escalus is very fascinating. Because I know he's initiated in all these mysteries,
he gets in trouble, he almost gets killed for spilling the beans of what these mysteries are.
Well, anyways, before we even get to that, I noticed that in that text, he really has this
long dialogue between Hermes, who is sort of a tempter. He's the mouth word, he's the logos of
Zeus. He's the word, he's the, he's the messenger of Zeus, basically. Zeus is won't see him. He's
like, why can't Zeus come himself? And I noticed that Prometheus is like antagonizing him,
and Hermes is tempting him, oh, we'll let you go, just, you know, just bend the knee, just bend the
knee. And Prometheus refuses to cave into the tempter. What is this about?
He's the angel Gabriel. Oh, that's awesome. Hermes is who later becomes Jibril, you know,
or the angel Gabriel. That makes a lot of sense. Brings the Quran to Muhammad, you know, and so on
and so forth. And so this, this messenger of God, the announcer comes and basically, or
Poth, you know, comes and basically, he tries to, okay, he's not just tempting Prometheus,
he's trying to torture a secret from out of them, because when Prometheus is bound by Zeus,
it's not just a punishment, it is a torture that's intended to break Prometheus so that
he reveals the secret of who is going to overthrow Zeus. Prometheus, with his forethought, and by the
way, the mother of Prometheus is famous, not to be confused with Thadus, who we're going to talk
about momentarily, but famous, the tightness is the mother of Prometheus, and she was the creator
of the Oracle of Delphi, which she later gives to Apollo. So the prophetic power that's associated
with the Oracle of Delphi is also somehow implicit in the myth of Prometheus, because famous, the
creator of the Oracle of Delphi is the mother of Prometheus. So anyway, Prometheus, with his
prophetic power and his forethought, the kind of forethought and projection that also becomes
instrumental to technological science, right? Technological science is all about projection.
And so Prometheus, with his power of projection, his forethought and his prophecy,
knows who is going to eventually overthrow Zeus. And it turns out that it is the soul
who later winds up being born as Achilles. And what Prometheus knows is that Zeus is going to rape
famous, you know, Zeus is a serial rapist. He just turns into all these various animals and goes down
and basically rapes these women, these poor women. And Prometheus knows that one of these women is
going to be famous. And so Achilles is going to be born as a proper hero, a hero in the old sense
of a hybrid. He's going to be a demigod. And this demigod version of Achilles is going to lead
humanity into rebellion and overthrow Zeus and be a new sovereign over humanity and much more
beneficent, much more humanitarian ruler from the throne of Olympus. And later what winds up
happening is that actually Zeus finds out that this is going to happen. And so
Zeus has, or Zeus basically pulls back and lets famous be married to Peleus,
who becomes the human mortal father of Achilles. And then we have the whole story of Achilles and
the Iliad. But this Achilles was supposed to be born as a demigod and Prometheus knows this
and he wants to torture this out of Prometheus. And so he keeps sending Hermes. He keeps sending
Hermes to try to convince Prometheus to give up this secret. While we're on this though, let me
point out why is it significant that it's Achilles? And by the way, I discussed this at length in
Prometheus and Atlas. The devil's really in the details here and I go into the Iliad and its
connection to this part of the myth of Prometheus in my chapter on Prometheus in Prometheus and
Atlas. If you look at the character of Achilles and the Iliad, his conflict with Agamemnon
and the defiant stance that he takes amidst the Trojan War shows you the first figure in Greek
literature who is questioning the social order. In Archaic Greece, there was no conceptual distinction
between social order and nature. Nature was framed as a concept by the early philosophers.
Who are writing about 150 years at least after the Iliad, at least. In the time of the Iliad,
in the time of quote unquote Homer, whether there was actually a Homer who wrote this or
whether he was a Bard who later recited it, whatever. In the time of quote unquote Homer,
there was no conceptual distinction yet between nature and the nature of things in society. It
was believed that customs were God given the way that, you know, the seasons are God given.
The way that the habits of animals are God given, social institutions are just the way things are
and they can't be questioned anymore than, you know, the way the birds and the bees live on.
Right? It's all just the way things inevitably have to be. Right. And so when you see Achilles
in the Iliad basically call bullshit on Agamemnon and confront him as an unjust tyrannical ruler
and a bad commander and stand up for himself pridefully, some would say with hubris, the kind
of hubris that we see from Prometheus ultimately. Right. You are seeing the first questioning of
the social order and implicit framing of the concept of justice. Wow. As opposed to the way
things just are. So Achilles is saying, sorry, fuck that. Things shouldn't be this way.
They should be some other way. Right. And this is the kernel of the idea of Utopia right here
in the figure of Achilles. So what's being said in the myth of Prometheus, where Prometheus knows
that it's Achilles who's going to overthrow Zeus if he's allowed to be born as a demigod,
is that there's a connection being made back to the story of the Iliad
and to the first framing of a just order, as opposed to the de facto order of the world,
the first aspiration for Utopia. That is also part and parcel of this part of the Prometheus myth.
It's the birth of progressivism. And I just thought of something. There's an epigram in
the first century. I think during the time of Vespasian or Domitian or something like that,
Marshall was the author. And he says that he has a quick little hymn or epigram, I guess they're
called, where he says Prometheus, just as Prometheus is bound to the Scythian cliff, nourished the
constant bird with the glut of his stomach. So did Laurelis hanging from a cross that was no stage
prop offered up his uncovered trails to the Caledonian bear. And I noticed that there's this
this is somebody who's inspired by the Epicureans and the naturalists and the Stoics. And he's
looking at Prometheus as an example, this great example of sacrificing yourself for the good,
for the progress of the world. And that brings us to Christianity. Are they trying to do something
similar to this with Jesus? I think so. Yes, although it's a perversion of it, and we'll come
to that. But and notice also in this quote, the Scythian peaks. Right. So yet again, the Greeks
knew that the place where Prometheus was bound was Scythian territory. And this connects again
back to the myth of Amirani and how there's an awareness here that somehow this Prometheus myth
has Scythian origins. Right. At least one of its vectors is Scythian. The other one is the
myth of Enki and probably were fused in the Persian Empire. So speaking of the Persian Empire,
we're talking about Escalus. And Escalus, you know, he's famous as a as a poetic playwright and
really as the founder of drama. And, you know, in its current form, before Escalus,
there was only a single bar reciting a poem on a stage. And it's Escalus who introduced other
characters and created a drama where there's multiple perspectives. Right. And this is again,
this is not where I was about to go. But, you know, again, we need to pause and just reflect on
this for a minute. Yeah. But just just contemplate what a transformation of human consciousness
that is. And again, this is something I go into at length in Prometheus and Atlas.
Before Escalus, you had a bard who was basically reciting an ancestral tradition.
And you only had that bard's perspective. And moreover, the bard did not insert himself into
the poem so as to, you know, interject any commentary on it. Right. You're just having a
person acting as a medium for the transmission of ancestral tradition. Escalus invents this thing,
which we call drama in retrospect, where there's multiple characters and they each have their
own perspective. So think about this. What effect does this have on people's consciousness where
they're watching a stage play where for the first time, they're getting multiple characters
with different divergent perspectives, each of which the audience member could choose to identify
with and to flip between these divergent perspectives. And moreover, the setting for this
drama with multiple characters in it is an amphitheater where literally there's multiple
perspectives on the drama. Right. Depending on where you're sitting in the amphitheater on any
given night, during the many times that you go to see a stage play, you will have one or another
varying perspective on the drama. So there's the perspectival shift between the various characters
and then the perspectival shift in terms of geometry, perceptual geometry of the audience
member sitting in an amphitheater. And lo and behold, this is the moment when we go from really
stiff Egyptian style sculptures in Greece to photorealistic three-dimensional sculptures in
Greece with that extremely true to life, high precision that classical Greek sculptures are
famous for. Do you think that just happened by accident? Now what happened? Because you had
sculptors who were sitting there in amphitheaters watching stage plays from varying perspectives
on different night, different evenings, and they discovered perspective, both geometric
perspective and also psychological perspective by flipping between the viewpoints of different
characters in a drama. Escalus is responsible for this. And which is the first of the dramas that
Escalus composed? Who is the first figure of tragedy, Prometheus? Right. So you see, this is
also bound up into the myth of Prometheus, this elevation mutation of human consciousness
that becomes so defining of classical Greek culture and in particular its excellence in the arts.
And then by extension, geometry as well, which becomes the cornerstone for all of the
sciences. I mean, let no one who hasn't studied geometry enter here. It was a
statement over the doorway to Plato's Academy. And by the way, in Plato's Academy,
since I mentioned that Plato's Academy, there was a altar to Prometheus. Wow. There was a burning
fire on an altar in Plato's Academy. And there was a tradition of lighting torches in this fire altar
and running them down into the city of Athens from there. And in fact, Plato opens his republic,
which is probably his most Promethean text. Plato opens republic with the image of this torch race,
this torch bearing rally, the torch bearing relay race is the opening of Plato's republic.
And you know, this became then the basis for the lighting of the torch and the passing of the torch
in the Olympic Games, which probably shouldn't be called the Olympic Games, it should be called
the Promethean Games. Anyway, to go back to Escalus, because where did we, how did we get here? We
got here, I was talking about the Persian Empire. Right. Well, I was actually going to jump in real
quick before we get back to him. There's an author named, he's actually pretty famous, Erratus the,
Erratus thes. He's Erratus thes. Erratus thes. Sorry, I'm sorry. And he's one of the greatest
scientists of the age. And he has a story of Alexander the Great being in a cave near
Caucasus, where he identifies that the demigod Prometheus was here being imprisoned.
So Alexander the Great was like, this is a sacred place. Everybody stop what you're doing.
Let's offer sacrifice to Prometheus right here right now. And then Errin and Nicomedia also has
the same story in his books too. So that's just shows you how these elites love this god. He's
he's another category. He's special.
Let me let me just comment on that before we go back to the thread about Escalus,
because you said certain elites, whatever. Yeah. Well,
one can say many things about the Rockefellers, but one thing that David Rockefeller did that
was quite impressive was erect the statue of Prometheus in Rockefeller Center.
And which I tend to think of as the hard fire of New York City and basically the
sacred center of what is still hanging on as the cosmopolitan capital of the planet.
And when you look at the statue of Prometheus at Rockefeller Center,
it's Prometheus emerging from a rock
soaring through the celestial equator crossing the plane of the zodiac. So it's the
ecliptic and the zodiac and Prometheus is soaring through that emerging from out of a rock.
Well, the crossing of the celestial equator and the and the, you know, zodiac, plane of the zodiac
is the main symbol of Mithraism because Mithra grabs hold of the wheel work of the heavens
and shifts, you know, the sphere of the heavens creating the procession of the equinoxes
as he overpowers Zorvan or Kronos. Again, like Prometheus siding with Zeus to overthrow Kronos,
right? And then in the myths of Mithras, there are two versions of the myth of the birth of Mithras.
One of them is that he was born of a virgin, but that's the less popular version that then,
you know, influenced Christianity. The more popular version was that Mithra was born of a rock
he was born from out of a rock. Yeah. And moreover, in Mithraism, there is this stage of initiation,
penultimate stage of initiation, heliodromous, where the stage of the solar charioteer, where the
solar charioteer goes up there into the heavens and sets the world on fire, throws fire down. You
know, that praise from Jesus and the Gospels, I have come to cast fire upon the earth, right?
And so that's taken from this great initiation in Mithraism, where there's a casting of fire
down upon the earth from heaven. In the Greek, it's fire from Arunos. Fire from Arunos. And then
Elijah also says that too. And it's funny because Arunos is translated as heaven, but he's also a
god, the sky god, the heavens god. And he's a father of the, isn't he like the grandfather of the
Titans or something like that? Yes. So that's, that's right. And so, so, you know, Prometheus is
grandfather, right? grandfather Prometheus, who together with Gaia sired the Titans. And so in
the statue at Rockefeller Center, you see this flame in the hand of Prometheus. But here's the
thing. Prometheus, he's soaring up from the rock. So he's born out of the rock like Mithra.
He's soaring up over the crossing of the ecliptic and the plane of the zodiac like Mithra. And he's,
so he's in the heavens now, and he's holding this flame. And you have to, he's not holding a torch
bringing the fire to mankind, although obviously that's implied. It's Prometheus, right? Yeah.
Holding this flame in his hand, almost as if he's about to cast it down onto the earth.
So yet again, it's a reference to the myth of Mithra, particularly the grade of Chileodromos or
the solar chariots here, which is an image of a future fiery apocalypse of the earth that comes
from out of ancient Iranian religion. And so you were mentioning, how did I get here? The elites
and Prometheus, whoever designed that statue, I mean, man ship is credited with that statue,
but who told them to design it that way? And you know, what role did David Rockefeller have or
people around him? Whatever they were thinking, they knew that Prometheus is Mithra. They're the
same figure. I can see that too. This is an esoteric truth that's known by certain occult elites
throughout history, that Prometheus, the Titan, is the Titan Mithra. And you know, Mithra,
in the Indo-European religions, you always have this division between the gods and the Titans that
exists in every form of Indo-European religion. And in the Indo-Iranian branch, there is, like in
the Greek branch, this division between the Ahuras or Ashuras and the Devas, the Titans and the gods.
And Mithra is the most important of the Titans. So at war with Indra, who is this kind of thunderbolt
wielding Zeus-like figure among the Pantheon of the gods, among the Devas. So okay, you have that.
But where were we? We were talking about Escalus. And I just wanted to also mention the fact that
Escalus served in the Persian wars. And one of the other plays that he's famous for is the play
The Persians. He wrote a play The Persians. And you know, we were just talking about the invention
of perspective by Escalus in the context of, you know, his crafting of the art form of tragedy,
tragic drama. And it's interesting that in the Persians, Escalus is able to take the
perspective of the Persians. The Persians doesn't trash the Persians. It's a relatively sympathetic
portrayal of the Persians, including of Xerxes as a kind of tragic figure who, yeah, he suffers from
hubris. But so does Prometheus. And Prometheus is the hero of the Prometheus trilogy, which we only
we only have Prometheus bound left. But originally it was Prometheus the Firebringer,
Prometheus bound, and then Prometheus unbound. It's like Dark Knight, the trilogy. You have Dark
Knight, and he rises and then yeah. Exactly. Prometheus unbound was supposed to be the part
where Hercules comes and frees him, right, and so on kills the eagle and all that. And so this was
this great trilogy. It was the first proper drama of the Western world. And Prometheus was the first
tragic hero of the Western world. And so when he writes The Persians, and he depicts Xerxes as this
kind of tragic figure who suffers from his hubris, suffers a downfall on account of his hubris,
he's in a way almost empathizing with the enemy that he fought against on the battlefield
as a soldier in the Persian wars. He got into the mind of the enemy, and he was able to write this
drama, which, you know, portrays the Persians as something other than a cardboard cut out.
And that's also quite fascinating. And I don't think it's incidental at all,
that Prometheus gets valorized as a heroic figure, as a not just creator, but champion and benefactor
of mankind against the tyrannical and unjust God at just the time when the Persian Empire takes over
a large part of Greece. Askelos is living in a Persian dominated Greece. Yes, the Athenians are
still resisting, but most of Greece is under Persian rule at this time. And the cities where
philosophy is getting off the ground are all Persian ruled cities. And so, you know, not only
does the Prometheus myth have an Indo-European kernel in the myth of Amirani, there's a reevaluation
of Prometheus in Greek culture, where he goes from being this, the story of Prometheus goes from being
this, how can I put it, warning against defying the gods, a kind of morality tale that is meant to
emphasize the power of Zeus, which is what you get in Hesiod, and the earliest presentation of
Prometheus, to the Prometheus of Eskelos, who is a tragic hero. What's responsible for that almost
moral inversion that takes place that what Nietzsche would call reevaluation of values,
what's responsible for that? Well, the Persian colonization of Greece, because from the Persian
Zoroastrian or Mithraic perspective, Zeus is Ahreman and Prometheus is Ahura Mazda and or Mithra.
And so, you can see reflected in the reevaluation of Prometheus as a hero,
a Greek assimilation of Persian ideas, which then becomes fundamental for the whole developmental
trajectory of the Western world, you know, the developmental trajectory that Oswald Spengler
winds up calling Faustian. Spengler calls the West Faustian on the basis of Goethe's Faust,
Goethe's popularization of this alchemist, medieval alchemist who makes a deal with the
devil and so on and so forth, right? And basically, you know, usurps godly powers.
But in fact, Goethe, the author of Faust, admitted that in the dark night of his soul,
at the time in his life where he felt most alone and alienated and aggrieved, he looked to Prometheus
as his personal savior. Goethe wrote a, attempted to write a drama on Prometheus and he has a poem
that survived a fragmentary poem about Prometheus. And so Goethe, who's, you know, in hindsight,
through Spengler, responsible for coining the term the Faustian world to refer to the West,
Goethe actually admitted that Prometheus was his god.
Wow. That's what I wanted to get to in a second. But before I get to, I was going to ask you,
what's Prometheus, the state of Prometheus right now? What's his fate? Does he die? Does
is he ruin the world right now? What are your thoughts on that? But I also want to get into
the Gnost, how this trickles down into Gnostic theology. Which one do you think is, which one
should we tackle first? Well, they're deeply interrelated, okay, because, and okay, let me,
let me try to condense, you know, a rather complex and large scale observation into something as
concise as possible. And that's that just from, you know, the elements that we've already looked
at in the myth of Prometheus, you can see how this is a prototype for a lot of Gnostic mythology
and for the idea of the Gnostic savior, and for rebellion against the Archons and so on and so
forth. And you have the imagery of this, the serpent coiled around the tree as evil, whereas in
this, um, polemicized, you know, what do you, what do you say, Tannock, I guess, because it's
opposing it. This is the symbol of wisdom and knowledge. And for some reason, one's bad,
one's evil. And it's like, what's, they're at odds here. So yeah. Yes. And so very long story
short. And if you want to, to see my more in depth analysis of this in Prometheus, I get into this
in greater detail. And also, believe it or not, in my book, Closer Encounters, I wrote a book on
the UFO phenomenon called Closer Encounters. And it's a bit of a tome. It's a comprehensive
analysis of the entire close encounter phenomenon. And in chapter six, in the penultimate chapter
of that book, I get into Christianity in depth and detail and the genesis of the, the, the Christ
mythos. Okay. And how it is a form of social engineering, uh, by means of cognitive dissonance.
So in the Christ mythos, you have on the one hand Jesus in the gospels very clearly saying
that Jehovah is his father, that he's there to represent Yahweh. Yahweh is his father.
And in fact, not a dot of an I or a cross of a T from the Tanakh, the Old Testament, will pass out
of existence or out of relevance until the end of the world. And so Jesus speaking through one side
of his mouth affirms all the legalism of the Old Testament and takes pride in being the son
of this genocidal, tyrannical maniac sadist who is responsible for Moses' slaughter of these poor
golden calf worshipping, dancing Israelites in the Sinai Desert, who's responsible for the genocide
at Jericho, who's responsible for like just all the most horrendous, brutally inhuman acts you
can imagine, um, that are chronicled throughout the Old Testament. And of course, for all the
wonderful laws and Leviticus and Deuteronomy, right? I mean, the most like despicably inhuman,
uh, legal code and, um, basically structure of theocratic authority that we've seen in human
history. And so Jesus on the one hand is coming to validate all of that. And when you look at Jesus
from that perspective, you know, through those particular verses in the gospels, then the only
problem, sure, he says to the Jews, you know, you, you're, you're disinherited. The kingdom doesn't
belong to you anymore. It belongs to humanity. It belongs to anyone who follows my father, right?
From that perspective, his only problem with the Jews is the same problem that Yahweh had with the
Jews throughout the whole Old Testament, where Yahweh keeps telling these Jews, you rebellious
people never learn a lesson. He says they're uniquely rebellious people, right? Cause they
keep disobeying somehow, called them stiff neck people. Yep. Neck Israelites. They keep setting
up idols of various kinds of worshiping ish tar and ball and this one and that one. Okay.
And so Jesus's problem with the Jews is, is just that it's that, look,
Yahweh's had enough with your stiff, stiff neck rebelliousness. And so you're disinherited. You're
not the chosen people anymore. And the kingdom belongs, belongs to anybody who submits to Yahweh
through me. So that's one Jesus. And that's the Jesus that, you know, for all the differences
between Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, and Protestantism, including the evangelical churches
in the United States, for all the various doctrinal differences between these warring sects of
Christianity, all of them accept that version of Jesus in one way or another. That's the
institutional Jesus. And then you have this Gnostic Jesus. And what is this not? And there are
verses in the Gospels that support that too. Absolutely. All verses in the Gnostic Gospels.
And what the Gospels that were rejected at Nicaea, right? And what does this Jesus tell you?
Well, this Jesus tells you, I mean, that, you know, the law, you don't need to follow the law
as long as, you know, you, you, yeah, it's about the spirit and not the law. And
the world is a fallen material creation anyway. And Jesus is here to free you from the world,
because just like him, you're not of the world. And the world was created by these inferior
archons and not by the true God. And he's the way to find the true God and so on and so forth.
Yeah. But here's the thing. The Gnostic version of Christianity is pacifist. Yeah.
The Gnostic Jesus is a radical pacifist who rejects political rebellion.
To the extent that you embrace the legalistic Jesus that affirms Yahweh in the Old Testament,
maybe you could see that Jesus as a kind of political rebel. But if you go in the Gnostic
direction, then you're really emphasizing the pacifistic passages in the Gospels. And so
Gnosticism, Christian Gnosticism is a doctrine of pacifism. Why? Because this is a fallen world
governed by archons. And to the extent that you participate in political power, you are being
corrupted by archons, power is inherently corrupting from a Gnostic perspective. And if you ask me,
and I've laid this argument out at length in my various writings, like I just said,
this is cognitive dissonance. This is a doctrine directed to demoralize and
degenerate society. Because first of all, you're left in an intellectual contradiction.
You're left in an intellectual contradiction. Do I follow the Old Testament? Don't I follow
the Old Testament? This Jesus keeps contradicting himself, which then it screws with your head.
It's cognitive dissonance. You're made to believe, you're made to take on faith
two things that are contradictory to believe them at the same time.
Yeah. And what does that do? It puts you in a mental state where you're suffering extreme
tension. And in order to resolve that tension, you will latch on to anything as a life raft.
It's a psychological tactic.
It becomes a buffet of ideas that you can just pick and choose from. You know what?
Real quick, I just want to jump in real quick. Because one of the oldest monasteries that was
abandoned when Islam took over the Byzantine Eastern Empire, right next to where they thought
Mount Sinai was, which I don't know if it really is or not. But anyway, there was a monastery there.
And there's one of the oldest depictions of Jesus in the world that they found in this place.
And they figured out that if you mirror one side of Jesus's face, you get a perfect image.
And if you mirror the other side, you get a perfect image.
They're imposing two different faces on Jesus's face to show his dual nature.
So the early Christians knew what you're saying right now. This wasn't a secret.
This whole idea of putting a Bible in one spot and making a canon wasn't even a thing.
Marcian had his own gospel. He picked and choose what Jesus wanted to have in his own Bible.
The Gnostics had their own Jesus. The other guys had their own Jesus.
It wasn't until later that they put it all in one spot. And that's how you get this
weird schizophrenic message. But yeah, but to add to that.
But here's my point, Neil, is that regardless of which Jesus you go for, neither the institutional
legalistic Jesus, who is the son of Yahweh, nor the antinomian Gnostic savior,
is a figure who inspires active rebellion against unjust divinities, let's say.
Not to call them gods, right? The beings that become God and the angels for the Christians
and used to be Zeus and the Olympians for the Greeks, right? Neither image of Jesus
inspires active, meaning political rebellion against the unjust rule of heaven.
So Gnosticism is inherently disempowering. Christian Gnosticism is debilitating
because of its pacifism, because of the association of power inherently with the Arkons.
Whereas in the myth of Prometheus, you see a prototype for all of the most positive elements
of Gnosticism. But you see them in a context which totally rejects pacifism and calls for a militant
resistance against the unjust tyranny of heaven over the earth. And a demand for the
self-determination of mankind. So in that sense, Prometheism, a kind of theism based on Prometheus,
the spirituality that's implicit in the myth of Prometheus, is protonostic, but it's satanic.
And this brings me to the other aspect of your question about where is Prometheus today,
what happened with Prometheus later. And so we see a reappropriation of the myth of Prometheus
at the dawn of the modern age, where you have Romantic poets, I mentioned Dutta earlier,
also Lord Byron, who writes a poem about Prometheus. And then most famously Byron's best friend,
Percy Shelley, who writes Prometheus Unbound, which is a four act play,
about the whole mythos of Prometheus, including the parts of the story that were lost in the
version of Escalus, about Prometheus ultimately being freed from his chains and so on and so forth.
And one really interesting thing about the Prometheus Unbound play written by Percy Shelley
around 1820, is that he uses all Latin names for the characters. Like he uses Jupiter instead of
Zeus, or Mercury instead of Hermes, but not for Prometheus. And what would Prometheus be in Latin?
Lucifer. And he makes it abundantly clear, Shelley does, that the flood, you know, the flood that
Ducalion helps save some portion of mankind from, is the flood of Noah. And that the civilization
that was destroyed by Yahweh was Atlantis, is the Greek Atlantis, the ruins of Atlantis at the
bottom of the ocean, feature in Shelley's Prometheus Unbound play. And so Shelley underlines the fact
that Prometheus is deeply connected to Atlantis. It's not accidental that, or incidental, that
the king of Atlantis is named Atlas. So Atlantis means the realm of Atlas. That's where the name
Atlantis comes from. It means the realm of Atlas, because Poseidia was ruled by a king called Atlas.
In fact, the kings were all called Atlas. And so I'm guessing this was a title, not a proper name
of a person. And the person who was the sovereign of Atlantis was given this title,
in reference to the brother of Prometheus, namely the Titan Atlas, who leads the Titans in
war against the gods. He's the general of the Titan army in the Titanomachia. And what do the
Atlanteans do? The core of the myth of Atlantis, the Plato recounts for us in Timaeus and Critias,
is that the Atlanteans lead a war against the Limpus. They attempt to unify the whole earth
under their naval rule. And they're no longer worshiping the gods. They've become totally
irreverent toward the Olympians. And this is why when they're on the brink of unifying the whole
earth, Zeus decides to wipe them off the face of the planet with this deluge. So Shelley,
in Prometheus' Unbound, depicts the destruction of Atlantis. And he makes it quite clear that this
is a parallel to the biblical flood story. And he's associating Prometheus with the rebel angels,
with the fallen angels, who were punished by Yahweh. And so, point being, in the modern era,
you see authors like Gtta, Lord Byron, and Percy Shelley explicitly appropriate the myth of Prometheus
as a positive image of Satan. People often talk about Satan as an entirely negative figure
that cannot be dissociated from Christianity, that's predicated on Christianity, that's parasitic
on Christianity. But folks, there's a Satan before Satan, and that's Prometheus. And one place that
this becomes abundantly clear is in the modern Prometheus. You ask about where is Prometheus
today? Where is Prometheus in the modern age? Well, look, the alternate title for Frankenstein,
the subtitle of the book, is the modern Prometheus. So Percy's wife, Mary Shelley, pens this tale in
which we have an extremely Luciferian depiction of Dr. Frankenstein as the modern Prometheus.
And so, you know, we're on the verge of a new world with AI and virtual reality and all this
cutting edge technology that's really going to change everything. Like, we're right on the
border of what's about to happen. Yes, and Frankenstein was the first of these great sci-fi stories
that involved transhuman technologies. And you can see the debt to Frankenstein or the modern
Prometheus throughout the history of modern science fiction, up to and including Ridley Scott's
Prometheus. Ridley Scott's film in 2012, Prometheus, the prequel to the alien saga,
is very much a retelling of Frankenstein in a cosmic context. So the myth of Prometheus,
I would say, is very much alive. Yeah. Well, especially if you combine it with Mithra, because
we live in a legalistic age, everything we do is all, you know, sign this document, you know,
make sure that everything's lawful. Like, no, but you have like banking systems and we have systems
in place, PayPal, it's all mediators and signing on the dotted line and technology. It really is
in a spiritual sense, whether you, however you want to interpret this, it's a world ruled by
Prometheus hyphen Mithra. Yeah. And the point is to take back this technology to,
you know, reintegrate these capacities that we were gifted with by Prometheus for the sake of
fostering human flourishing, rather than allowing ourselves to be dehumanized by this technology.
Right. Prometheus brought the gift of technique to man so that we could determine our own destiny,
not so that we could wind up being instrumentalized into something like the board, not so that,
you know, AI could ensconce us in such a fashion as to, you know, divest us of our humanity and,
you know, leave us with a hive mind. So, you know, right now we are at the 11th hour,
we're at a key turning point in the face of the technological singularity where we have to
basically retrieve the poetic power of the Prometheus myth and to understand technological
science in the right way as a tool to empower our evolution so that we can transform, you know,
like that caterpillar in the chrysalis into the butterfly, the butterfly that appears
at the creation of humanity in the myth of Prometheus. And so I would say that, you know,
Prometheus is a figure that represents the promise of technological science,
but there's also this shadow side, this Frankensteinian danger that we face,
right, approaching this technological singularity within this very century.
And so it's more important than ever right now to positively re-appropriate this myth
and understand the power that it already has over us unconsciously. We need to take that
unconscious power, that demonic power, of the Prometheus archetype over our society
and transform it into something that's more self-conscious and that can be directed in a
positive manner as a force of liberation and enlightenment. Yeah, and do you think
for in the context of like, I don't know, maybe climate change, for example, like,
if there's some sort of, some sort of threat of some disaster on earth, Prometheus being the
archetype of this, the only thing that can save us is, you know, we have to figure out a way through
technology to get ourselves right, maybe, I don't know, go off into space or something,
I don't even know what that is, but that also represents this sort of butterfly effect of
like a metamorphosis of the human nature, of humanity. Like, we need to change something,
or else if we keep going down this path, it's done, we're done, we're going to be wiped out,
right? Absolutely, that's right. But we also need to remember that, so, you know, retreat,
ludditism and retreat back to nature and to pre-industrial society and all this crap that's
being promoted by a lot of elites today, right, the eco-friendly lifestyle. No, no, no, no, we
can use technology to save the ecosystem. But the other thing we have to remember is that Prometheus
didn't just give us the fire of the forge, the fire that he gifted mankind with is also the fountain
head of all of the arts and crafts. In other words, literature, painting, right, drama,
as per Escalus. So there is a unity of science and art that, you know, is at the core of the
myth of Prometheus. And we need to cultivate that aesthetic sensibility so that we use technology
in ways that are poetic, in ways that are not alienating and instrumentalizing, but that are
part of the expansion of the creative capacity of humanity. Because Prometheus is also the deity
of the arts, of literature, of poetry. And that's something that we shouldn't lose sight of, right,
as we enter this crucible of the technological singularity, we are going to need to be more
artful than ever before. So that we use technology as a tool for liberation and empowerment,
rather than allowing it to be an instrument of dehumanization.
Yeah, I think the idea of becoming like gods, by copying what's in nature onto technology,
we can create systems of travel or whatever, that is just beyond our even capacity to even think
how great we can be right now, you know? As Shelley says, and this is a good note to end on,
as Shelley says in Prometheus Unbound, we can come up with arts as of yet undreamed of, arts
that have been, haven't even been conceived by the mind of the gods, right? And so it's not a
question of copying nature, it's a question of bettering nature, we can do better than nature,
we can do better than the gods, we can improve upon nature. And so therefore you see that from a
Christian perspective, right, even including a Gnostic Christian perspective, because the Gnostic
doesn't want to improve this world, the Gnostic wants to escape this world. From a Christian
perspective, Gnostic or otherwise, this is Satanic. The idea that we can do better than the gods,
we can best God more nature, that is the core of the Prometheus-ness.
It's eating the fruit of knowledge, literally. It's accepting, and by the way, it's also reflected
in Persephone eating the pomegranate, it's like a mirror of that. But speaking of taking the fruit
of knowledge, you have just attained true Gnosis. And by the way, check out Jason Rezegerd on his
books on Amazon, links are in the description. You have just attained true Gnosis.
The Demiurge has no power over you.